📝 draft proposal for testing, CI and CD plan for the site (#152)
adobe/developer.adobe.com: docs/TESTING-CI-CD.md

tests, these tests can be executed against any environment - local, staging, and
production. Going even further, the implementation of the underlying website is
irrelevant. That is a big deal for us as we have an AEM-powered version of the
site being maintained alongside a Helix-powered version. If done well, these
tests could be written in a manner that could be used for either implementation.

*TODO*: End-to-end tests need to be implemented in such a way that they can be
run in any environment, against either `hlx` or AEM powered versions of the
site.

However, because of all this power and flexibility, they are _much_ slower than
unit tests. At the time of writing this document, `npm run test:unit` runs seven
tests and takes ~11ms, while `npm run test:e2e` runs 2 tests and takes 13.74s.

## Continous Delivery Pipeline

What could a realistic, implemetable-in-the-short-term CD pipeline implementation
look like for the Helix Site? This would need to balance with [future Helix testing goodness](#future-helix-testing-goodness)
and short-term automation needs of this site. Ideally, both are developed in
tandem and both inform each other.

### Draft Pipeline Implementation Proposal

> Rough outline of such a CD pipeline implementation could be:

Reviewer: note that this all happens on the dedicated branch of the pull request....

Author: No, I don't think so. The pipeline would vary a little based on whether it is running against a pull request or branch, or whether it is running against `master`. PRs would get tested and `hlx build` - nothing more. `master` branch pushes would go through the full delivery pipeline, `hlx deploy`, `hlx publish`, etc.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @tripodsan, the stuff that runs on a branch should be as close as the stuff than runs on `master` and this includes the publishing of branch-specific strains (which is why we generate these anonymous strains).

The biggest difference I see between branch and master is that master should be more sequential, whereas on branch we can parallelize some steps. In addition, master needs rollbacks, branches don't.

Author: How is the URL for the final published anonymous strain determined in this case, then?

- run linter and unit tests (i.e. `npm test`)
    - to be debated: also end-to-end/clicky/functional tests in _local_ environment, which is currently done, or no? if no, we should formalize when to run these.
        - also worth noting that these could be run on Sauce Labs, in parallel,
            when done via CI. This would drastically decrease the time required
            to get this feedback as compared to running this locally.
    - *TODO*: performance (rendering) testing should be added here

> - run `rm -rf .hlx && hlx build` and ensure there are no errors.

Reviewer: `hlx clean && hlx build`

- run `hlx deploy`. (TODO: any flags needed here?)
- commit the config and ensure ci skips said commit. (TODO: what does the command

>     look like?)

Reviewer: `git commit -am"saving deploy changes [ci skip]`

> - ensure runtime actions respond as expected. (TODO: what does this mean?)

Reviewer: * one feature that could help is: https://github.com/adobe/helix-cli/issues/373

Reviewer 2: This means you run a small integration test that calls the function with known content in Runtime and you match (regex or DOM matcher) the output.

- run `hlx publish`. (TODO: any flags needed here?)
- ensure fastly responds as expected (TODO: what does this mean?)
- to be debated: also end-to-end/clicky/functional tests in _deployed_ environment

Questions left unanswered in this proposal:

- do we have a staging environment?
    - is it part of the requirements for this proposal?
    - and if so, where does it fit into the CI/CD pipeline?

Ideally the above gets implemented as part of the CircleCI config and is
delivered as part of the definition of done for
[#44](https://github.com/adobe/developer.adobe.com/issues/44).

## Future Helix Testing Goodness

- Full default helix CI/CD implementation currently a work in progress:
    [adobe/helix-cli#582](https://github.com/adobe/helix-cli/issues/582)

> - Caliper (?) can be used for thresholds for different environments which can be used. A micro service is already wrapping it in helix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Calibre](https://calibreapp.com) can be used for thresholds for different environments which can be used. A [micro service is already wrapping it in helix](https://github.com/adobe/helix-perf).
```

# Testing Strategy

This document aims to detail how testing and continuous integration + deployment
works for this project. Parts of it may be aspirational, and when possible, this
is called out and an issue is linked.

## Requirements

In order to keep this project easy to contribute to, we want testing, and in particular
local testing, to be simple. Anyone should be able to run the tests without too
much hassle. To that end we want adhere to certain restrictions:

- `npm install && npm test` should be all that's needed

>   - As such, is the requirement for running clicky tests locally (install a browser) too heavy? Discuss and debate.

Reviewer 3: users having to have chrome installed isn't too heavy IMO

Reviewer 4: "clicky tests" are heavy and slow, they should be run by the CI, not by the dev.

Author: I'm perfectly fine with either answer. If it's only _required_ on the CI, I think that's fine. It would still be possible for developers to run it locally, if they have the right requirements installed.

Reviewer 4: sure, developers will have to run then locally at one point, especially when... they write them and when they add new UI features / capabilities.

Reviewer 5: i agree, having the clicky tests to run by CI. however, @filmaj and @stevengill I have some additional thoughts here, we can discuss offline and can add it here after discussion.

Reviewer 2: I'd auto-skip clicky tests when the prerequisites aren't met, so that they don't constitute a test failure on the local machine. On CI, they should always run.

## Current Implementation

Two types of tests currently exist: [unit tests](#unit-tests) (fast, in-memory,
purely logical) and [end-to-end/clicky/functional tests](#end-to-end-tests).

### Unit Tests

[This project's unit tests](../test/unit) are fast, run in memory and exercise
purely logical functionality revisioned in this project. As such, most programming
errors _that apply to code revisioned in this project_ can be caught with unit
tests. However, programming errors in libraries that this project depends on usually
cannot be easily caught with unit tests. Additionally, stylistics or UI issues
as well as performance cannot be easily verified using unit tests.

Things that are a good fit for unit testing include:

- Helix pipeline `*.pre.js` files revisioned under [`src/`](../src)
- Any utility or helper modules written that are leveraged in `*.pre.js`
    modules.

### End to End Tests

> [This project's end-to-end tests](../test/e2e) currently require Chrome to be

Reviewer 4: That's why I would have kept "my" smoke tests as before, you do not need extra stuff to have some level of confidence the things are running. The e2e could come afterward.

Author: We could easily re-introduce the sort of browserless integration tests you had before. The only difference in those is that it removes the complexity of browser agent implementations from the tests. So they fall somewhere in between the unit and end-to-end test spectrum.

I still think we want real browser automation as part of a small but mission critical test suite for the site. Perhaps not for running locally but definitely for running on CI, and ideally to be running remotely on Sauce Labs (where then we can easily branch out to several types of browsers, for example, and leverage parallel execution).

installed. These tests spin up a real browser (not necessarily Chrome) and
automate the browser to load URLs, find elements, click them, run JavaScript in
these browser sessions - the automation possibilities are endless. Unlike unit
tests, these tests can be executed against any environment - local, staging, and
production. Going even further, the implementation of the underlying website is
irrelevant. That is a big deal for us as we have an AEM-powered version of the
site being maintained alongside a Helix-powered version. If done well, these
tests could be written in a manner that could be used for either implementation.

However, because of all this power and flexibility, they are _much_ slower than
unit tests. At the time of writing this document, `npm run test:unit` runs seven

> tests and takes ~11ms, while `npm run test:e2e` runs 2 tests and takes 13.74s.

Reviewer 4: Integration Tests and e2e should easily run on the CI: you code your stuff, you write the unit tests, you code is fine and test, you commit and push. The CI tells you if you code introduced a regression in the "big" picture. This naturally comes afterward and waiting for the CI to inform you is a natural process.

## Continous Delivery Pipeline

What could a realistic, implemetable-in-the-short-term CD pipeline implementation
look like for the Helix Site? This would need to balance with [future Helix testing goodness](#future-helix-testing-goodness)
and short-term automation needs of this site. Ideally, both are developed in
tandem and both inform each other.

### Draft Pipeline Implementation Proposal

Rough outline of such a CD pipeline implementation could be:

- run linter and unit tests (i.e. `npm test`)

>     - to be debated: also end-to-end/clicky/functional tests in _local_ environment, which is currently done, or no? if no, we should formalize when to run these.

Reviewer 6: As @kptdobe already stated above, I'd move those to the CI to keep local development light.

        - also worth noting that these could be run on Sauce Labs, in parallel,
            when done via CI. This would drastically decrease the time required
            to get this feedback as compared to running this locally.

> - run `rm -rf .hlx && hlx build` and ensure there are no errors.

Reviewer 6: `rm -rf .hlx` should not be required (and if it currently is, it is a CLI bug)

Reviewer: ^^--- see my comment above :-)

Reviewer 6: Yep, saw it too late :)

- run `hlx deploy`. (TODO: any flags needed here?)
- commit the config and ensure ci skips said commit. (TODO: what does the command

>     look like?)

Reviewer 6: I think you put `[ci skip]` in your commit message

Reviewer: ^^-- see my comment above :-)

- ensure runtime actions respond as expected. (TODO: what does this mean?)
- run `hlx publish`. (TODO: any flags needed here?)

> - ensure fastly responds as expected (TODO: what does this mean?)

Reviewer 6: For Runtime and Fastly, you could use sth like DOM comparison to make sure key elements are present in the output...

Author: As discussed with @kptdobe above, I think we should run the full automated browser clicky tests at this point, on whatever environment the pipeline applies to (staging or production).

Reviewer 2: I see the runtime (HTML DOM comparison) as a good intermediary step. If the runtime deployment failed, or errors, or gives unexpected results, you will know right away. CDN caching might obscure some of these issues in the clicky test.

Author: @trieloff so a `hlx publish` doesn't reset the fastly cache?

> - to be debated: also end-to-end/clicky/functional tests in _deployed_ environment

Reviewer 4: Having the e2e tests running against the _deployed_ env is a good idea. 

This is all inline with @trieloff proposal (see https://github.com/adobe/helix-cli/issues/582).

It is probably not too complex to setup: have a config that runs the e2e tests against `localhost`, one against the runtime version after `hlx build` and one against `adobe.io` after the `hlx publish`.

Reviewer 2: The biggest piece here is running the tests with a default `X-Strain: my-current-branch-strain` cookie set. This allows testing on a branch or PR in the real environment.

Author: @trieloff do you mean deploying a PR/branch version of the site to some non-localhost URL in order to run clicky tests against?

Questions left unanswered in this proposal:

> - do we have a staging environment?

Author: Yes, good point, I'll fold this point back into the proposal.

> - do we have a staging environment?

Author: That said, how does staging vs. production integrate into the full delivery pipeline? When do we deploy to staging, and when do we deploy to production?

> - do we have a staging environment?

Reviewer 2: I see two approaches here:

1. "staging environment": a domain name and a bunch of strains that always reflects a particular branch (not master)
2. "staging strains": each branch can be staged individually and automatically, and this would all happen on the production domain name (although the staging strains would need explicit Cookie setting)

"staging environments" is the more established approach, but for true CD you need "staging strains"

    - is it part of the requirements for this proposal?

>     - and if so, where does it fit into the CI/CD pipeline?

Reviewer 4: That's probably:
* an extra Fastly service with a specific domain / subdomain (staging.adobe.io...)
* after the merge from the branch to master, the CI/CD could deploy / publish the `staging` strain
* once all tests verified, deploy / publish to `prod` strain - this could be a manual step for now until the testing process is rolling and we have full confidence the publication could be fully automated. This probably depends on the number of tests and their quality.

Author: I like that, I'll take a stab at integrating that back into the proposal.

Reviewer 2: > * an extra Fastly service with a specific domain / subdomain (staging.adobe.io...)

Use the same service, one service can serve multiple domains.

> * after the merge from the branch to master, the CI/CD could deploy / publish the `staging` strain

Or multiple staging strains for multi-strain sites like the dev site

> * once all tests verified, deploy / publish to `prod` strain - this could be a manual step for now until the testing process is rolling and we have full confidence the publication could be fully automated. This probably depends on the number of tests and their quality.

I'd rather automate the publishing and have manual merge oversight than the other way around. Having a good testable environment for each PR is a requirement, so that you can do quick smoke tests there, in addition to the automated tests.
